---
layout: post
title: "Why I Joined Swan Bitcoin"
description: What is the most important thing in the world you could be working on right now?
date: 2020-08-18
blocktime: 644284
image: /assets/images/btc18-why-swan.jpg
source: https://www.swanbitcoin.com/why-i-joined-swan-bitcoin/
author: Gigi
category: bitcoin
tags:
 - Bitcoin
 - Writing
---

I have a picture on my wall that says the following: "You liter­ally
ought to be asking yourself all the time what is the most impor­tant
thing in the world I could be working on right now, and if you are not
working on that why aren't you?"

{% include image.html name="most-important-thing.png" %}

It is a quote by Aaron Swartz and my daily reminder for two things: (1)
life is short (2) impor­tant things exist, and working hard on them is
worth the sacri­fice so that the future might be brighter than the
present.

To me, that impor­tant thing is Bitcoin. 

### A Flock of Swans

I believe that the people behind
[Swan](https://www.swanbitcoin.com/) --- Cory, Yan, Brady, Brandon,
Brekkie, Jörn, Reed, and many others --- under­stand the impor­tance of
Bitcoin. They under­stand that making the transi­tion to a sat-dominated
world as painless as possible, for as many people as possible, is one of
the most impor­tant things you could be working on. As more people opt
into Bitcoin, having a way to seamlessly move from the fiat world into
the Bitcoin world is essen­tial. I know of no better way than auto-DCA:
set it and forget it. Ignore the noise, focus on the big picture, and
consis­tently stack sats on the way to hyper­bit­coiniza­tion. Switching
from manual buying to auto-DCA was one of the best decisions I ever made
as a bitcoiner, and I am delighted to join a company that is focused on
that. Less FOMO, less trading, less zero-sum games. More building, more
outreach, more Bitcoin Zen.

### Education Across the Pond

It seems that the amount of your exposure to fiat is inversely
corre­lated with your under­standing of money. Conse­quently, educa­tion
around this and other topics related to Bitcoin are dear to my heart.
Swan has a strong focus on educa­tion from the start, with Yan as the
author of *Inventing Bitcoin* and Brady, Citizen Bitcoin himself, as the
head of educa­tion. Most people still have no idea what Bitcoin is, how
it is different from other forms of money, and why they might want to
use it. I hope that this will change over the coming years, and I hope
that I will be able to contribute to Swan's effort of bringing Bitcoin
educa­tion to the masses. There is only one way to build an
[intran­si­gent
minority](https://www.swanbitcoin.com/ten-million-bitcoiners-the-intransigent-minority/):
one bitcoiner at a time.

### This Is Water

As David Foster Wallace famously said in his commence­ment speech: There
are these two young fish swimming along, and they happen to meet an
older fish swimming the other way, who nods at them and says, "Morning,
boys, how's the water?" And the two young fish swim on for a bit, and
then eventu­ally one of them looks over at the other and goes, "What the
hell is water?"

The metaphor might not be perfect, but I believe that in the world of
Bitcoin, code is the water that David Foster Wallace is speaking of.
I feel that I've been so immersed in Bitcoin that I forgot what makes it
all work: [code](https://github.com/dergigi). I'm excited to return to
my roots as a computer scien­tist and programmer to work on what makes
Bitcoin and the ecosystem around it work. I will continue to write words
as well, but damn does it feel good to write code again.

### Taking Flight

I feel blessed to be part of something so monumental, so profound, so
optimistic as Bitcoin. An orange beacon of hope, in a world that seems
to be split­ting apart at the seams. I feel blessed that I can work
along­side so many amazing bitcoiners --- inside and outside of
Swan --- people that tirelessly work towards a bright orange future.

I have the feeling that we are on the verge of something great. This
giant bird is about to take flight, and I hope the world is ready. We
will do our best to get as many people on board as possible, as safely
as possible. It won't always be easy, but I know in my heart that it is
the most impor­tant thing in the world I could be working on right now.

Onward!
