---
layout: post
title: "True Names Not Required"
description: On the Internet, nobody knows you're a dog.
date: 2020-07-21
blocktime: 640147
image: /assets/images/btc17-true-names.jpg
source: https://www.citadel21.com/true-names-not-required
author: Gigi
category: bitcoin
audio: /assets/audio/true-names.ogg
tags:
 - Bitcoin
 - Writing
translations:
 - language: Italian
   url: https://bitcoin-translate.it/blog/20200730.php
   author: Italian Satoshi
   author_url: https://twitter.com/italiansatoshi
 - language: Finnish (audio)
   url: https://anchor.fm/oispa-pitkoo/episodes/10-Lukemisia---Oikeita-nimi-ei-vaadita-e15tmeb
   author: Oispa Pitkoo
   author_url: https://twitter.com/OispaPitkoo
---

In 1981, at a time where the internet was in its infancy (and I was just
a gleam in my father's eye), the legendary mathematician, computer
scientist, and science-fiction author Vernor Vinge published his
prophetic novella *True Names*. The story unfolds in two realms: the
real world ([meat space][bitcoins-habitats]) and the
Other Plane (cyberspace). Reading it today, many concepts dreamed up in
the book seem neither strange nor far-fetched. For example, spending the
better part of your waking hours in cyberspace, a place where most
people know you by your pseudonym (and not your True Name), might have
been science-fiction in the 80ies. Today, thanks to the internet and the
abundance of virtual worlds it spawned, it is a regular part of life.

[bitcoins-habitats]: {% post_url /bitcoin/2020-03-01-bitcoin-s-habitats %}

It is no accident that Bitcoin was created by a pseudonymous entity. The
legend of Satoshi Nakamoto will always be a part of Bitcoin's story,
which in turn means that the concepts explored in *True Names* ---
identity, privacy, anonymity, pseudonymity --- will be part of it as
well.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-twitter.png" caption="Discovering Bitcoin and plugging yourself into #BitcoinTwitter (original illustrations by Bob Walters)" %}

I was born in a small town in Austria, a town that shall remain nameless
for the time being. We were living in a quiet and family-friendly
neighborhood, in a quiet and family-friendly house, with a garden, two
cats, and beautiful plum-, pear-, and cherry-trees. The cats were named
"Mimmi" and "Morli," keeping with the family tradition of grouping
things by the first letter. Being cats, they didn't really care if you
called them by their name. The only thing they would listen to was the
sweet sound of Whiskas cans being opened. Way before I learned that cats
are somewhat agnostic to identity, I had to learn to make sense of this
world. I had to get familiar with the very pegs we hang our ideas on; I
had to learn how to speak. I don't know when I started babbling, but
when I did, I repeatedly said one syllable, over and over again: *dʒɪ*.

My sister, both jokingly and lovingly, repeated that all the time and so
it came to be that she gave me a nickname that stuck ever since: *Gigi*.

{% include image.html name="shitcoin-sea.jpg" caption="Turning away from a sea of shitcoins." %}

It's funny how some things turn out. I'm pretty sure she didn't think
much of it at the time. After all, she was only five years older than
me. (She still is; I never managed to catch up!) After a while, all the
kids in the neighborhood started to refer to me as Gigi. Since this was
at a time before I had a chance to think about identity in any way, it
came to be that I never truly identified with my real name. In essence,
Gigi became my real name. If you didn't call me that, I wouldn't react.
Over the years this became so engrained that pretty much everyone who
got to know me didn't use my legal name: teachers, professors, my
employers, co-workers, friends --- even today it isn't uncommon that
people who know me quite well don't know my legal name at all.

On the internet, this is normal. You get to know people, their handles,
their personalities, what they post, how they react, in short: what they
are like --- to some extent at least. This is even more pronounced in
the gaming world, where intense interaction, voice communication, and a
shared reality come into play. I've had quite a few friends over the
years that I would consider real, true friends. Friends I've met online,
thanks to the lovely world of online gaming. People I've talked to every
day for several years. People whose life stories I know intimately, and
they know mine. We've been through hardships and heartbreaks, talked
until the sun rose again, got drunk, shared secrets. Most of these
people I've met in meat space at a later point in time. Some, however, I
haven't met to this day. I will probably never meet them, now that my
gaming days are mostly behind me. And that's fine. I grew up in a world
where nicknames, handles, pseudonyms, and anonymity are the norm, and I
wouldn't have it any other way. That's one of the reasons why I love the
internet, and it's one of the reasons why I love Bitcoin: you don't need
a fixed identity to use it. That's the beauty of it: True Names not
required.

{% include image.html name="meme-wars.jpg" caption="Early training for the great meme wars of the future." %}

Unsurprisingly, the whole idea of anonymity and pseudonymity is under
attack. People conspire in digital witch hunts to find out the True
Names of pseudonymous personalities, trolls threaten to doxx people to
mess with their lives, and, sadly, [even
journalists](https://slatestarcodex.com/2020/06/22/nyt-is-threatening-my-safety-by-revealing-my-real-name-so-i-am-deleting-the-blog/)
threaten to reveal the real identities of their subjects these days. To
make matters worse, Google, Facebook, and Amazon want to make you
believe that you have one true identity. That you can be measured,
parametrized, surveilled, and predicted. They promise benevolent
assistance thanks to algorithms that understand you better than you
understand yourself while cutting your identity into neatly packaged
pieces and selling them to the highest bidder. Banks and governments do
the same thing, by the way --- but without the reassuring promises.

What these companies don't realize is that identity is *prismatic*. Your
persona depends on circumstances and context, both in meat space and
online. You will present yourself differently in a night club as opposed
to a funeral, just like you will present yourself differently on Tinder
as opposed to LinkedIn --- at least I hope you do. Whom you talk to is
important as well: you will say different things --- and in a different
tone --- to your child, your lover, your pastor, your boss, the cute
barista at your favorite coffee shop, or the co-worker you can't stand
to see. You are also not the same person you were ten years ago. Your
interests and political views have probably changed, as has the way you
see the world and yourself. Thus, your identity is both fluid and
prismatic. In the words of Walt Whitman: you contain multitudes.

{% include image.html name="dergigi.jpg" %}

The cypherpunks recognized that a free society can not function if
identity is rigid and known to all. A free society requires the option
to selectively reveal yourself to the world, or not reveal yourself at
all.

> Privacy is necessary for an open society in the electronic age.
> Privacy is not secrecy. A private matter is something one doesn't want
> the whole world to know, but a secret matter is something one doesn't
> want anybody to know. Privacy is the power to selectively reveal
> oneself to the world.
>
> <cite>[Eric Hughes]</cite>

[Eric Hughes]: https://www.activism.net/cypherpunk/manifesto.html

The distinction between complete *anonymity* and *pseudonymity* is an
important one: anonymity does away with identity completely.
Pseudonymity allows for temporary identities. You might be a space cat,
a wizard, a Japanese programmer, a Shaolin, a Samourai, a dragon lord,
or a nocturnal Octopus who does magic at midnight. Pseudonyms allow you
to build up a character, a reputation, a self-image of your choosing.
Complete anonymity is crucial as well. It allows you to speak freely,
unencumbered from reputational loss, disconnected from your identity ---
constructed or not.

> Man is least himself when he talks in his own person. Give him a
> mask, and he will tell you the truth.
>
> <cite>[Oscar Wilde]</cite>

[Oscar Wilde]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oscar_Wilde

History has shown that in society in general, and [in Bitcoin in
particular](https://www.coindesk.com/many-bitcoin-developers-are-choosing-to-use-pseudonyms-for-good-reason),
you don't necessarily need to use your legal name to be recognized or
taken seriously. There is a reason why Eric Arthur Blair didn't choose
to publish his books under his True Name, but use a pseudonym: George
Orwell. Alisa Zinov'yevna Rosenbaum probably had her reasons too --- she
published her novels as Ayn Rand. Similarly, Satoshi Nakamoto had good
reasons to stay pseudonymous and not use his True Name. He chose to
protect his identity so he could eventually remove himself from the
picture, leaving Bitcoin without a leader and a creator. A gift from the
gods, if you will.

Paradoxically, pseudonyms can be more powerful than True Names. The best
example of this is probably Siddhārtha Gautama --- the Buddha. He
transformed himself into an idea. The Buddha can't be killed, even if
you kill the person currently known as the Buddha. The pseudonym
transcends the individual. We are all Buddha, at least potentially, at
least in part.

{% include image.html name="liberate-your-money.jpg" caption="Original artwork by Lucho Poletti" %}

Similarly, we are all Satoshi. Every single one of us who cares about
Bitcoin, driving it forward, educating others, starting and running
companies, pushing adoption, writing code, documentation, books, and
essays, making music, creating art. Everyone who uses Bitcoin how he or
she sees fit. Everyone who runs a node. Everyone who chooses to exit the
fiat system and hold some (or all) of their value in bitcoin. We are all
Satoshi because nobody is Satoshi. We are all doing our part to fix the
money, and in turn, fix the world. There used to be a Satoshi, but now
there is no Satoshi. He chose to keep his identity secret, and I hope we
will never find out what his True Name was. Not that it would matter ---
his gift to us is all that matters. Bitcoin was given to us, and now it
simply is. It doesn't require an identifiable creator because True Names
are not required.

{% include image.html name="masks.jpeg" %}

Just like names can transcend the individual and become something more
powerful, a mask can become a symbol in itself. In such cases the
utility of the mask becomes secondary --- the primary use is to show
support for a cause, to rally behind an idea or an ideal.

One of the most powerful scenes in the movie *V for Vendetta* is the
march of the masks in which thousands of citizens march toward the
Houses of Parliament, hiding their faces behind *Guy Fawkes* masks to
support the idea put forward by the masked protagonist.

{% include image.html name="hodlonaut.jpg" caption="#WeAreAllHodlonaut" %}

Not too long ago, analogous to the scene depicted in the movie, an army
of bitcoiners decided to (temporarily) change their online identities in
support of an individual (and the idea the individual embodies). I am
talking, of course, about our beloved and pseudonymous space cat. For a
couple of weeks, we all wore a mask. For a couple of weeks, we were all
hodlonaut. We were all hodlonaut because the thought that a pseudonymous
pleb can be doxxed, attacked, snuffed out, and silenced by rich and
lying assholes was so outrageous, so preposterous, so disturbingly wrong
that it was worth to stand up and put on a mask. We need to be able to
disassociate from our identities to protect ourselves. We need the
freedom to selectively reveal ourselves. We need the possibility to
rally behind names, symbols, masks, and the ideas they represent ---
using transient identities and wearing masks ourselves if we have to. If
identities are permanent and transparent, rebellion and revolution are
impossible.

The history of names and identities is a fascinating one. Before I fell
down the Bitcoin rabbit hole I've been working on passport and identity
software, effectively writing software for the surveillance state. There
are many things in my life that I'm not exactly proud of. Writing
software to automatically process, identify, and classify people is one
of them. Yes, the technology that powers facial recognition, fingerprint
scanners, and pattern matching is fascinating. Yes, the fact that you
can extract information from passports by simply tapping your phone on
them is cool technology (the little chip symbol on your passport means
that it has an [NFC chip](https://youtu.be/8W_jyqaeXQ0) in it). But is it
*necessary*? Is it even a good idea?

As you can probably guess, I don't believe it is. Normalizing the idea
of permanent identities will hasten the transformation of our
surveillance states into full-blown dystopian panopticons. Normalizing
the use of biometrics will make it even worse. While inconvenient, it is
possible to change your name. Need to change your face or your
fingerprints? Good luck with that. Remember: biometrics are usernames,
not passwords.

Back to identity. Keep in mind that passports were supposed to be a
*temporary* measure. Of course, as is custom for all temporary fixes,
passports are now a permanent part of our lives. How we use and see
names has changed quite drastically over time as well. We now imagine
that every person on the planet has a first name and a last name and
that these names will nicely fit the \[a-Z\] pattern of the systems that
process them. However, some people don't have last names. Others have
names that include (or consist solely of) numbers, and billions of
people have names that don't fit into the anglocentric alphanumeric
system at all. There are roughly a hundred million people named 王, for
example.

Historically, names and identities have always been intertwined. Many of
the common surnames are derived from occupations: Carter, Cooper,
Thatcher, Smith, Tailor, Fisher, Glover, Slater, Shoemaker, Weaver,
Ward, Webster --- all these and more are occupations turned family
names. Your name was a description of what you do, not defining who you
are in totality.

Legal names, by the way, aren't necessarily less weird than nicknames
can be. Grimes and Elon Musk decided to name their son "X Æ A-12", to
pick a recent example. The AI researcher and mathematician Ben Goertzel
named his kid "Qorxi" which is short for "quantum organized rational
expanding intelligence." There is also this one dude who decided to
change his legal name to "Captain Fantastic Faster Than Superman
Spiderman Batman Wolverine The Hulk And The Flash Combined," Frank
Zappa's daughters "Moon Unit" and "Diva Muffin" --- and many more, I'm
sure.

My point is this: Tying everything you do and every transaction you make
to one singular identity is not only unnecessary, it is a recipe for
disaster. It is a road that leads to the dystopian hellscape of social
credit scores --- the orgasmic dream of every dictator and totalitarian
ruler that ever lived.

Remember that it never was necessary in the first place. You go to the
baker, say hi, hand him some money, he hands you a loaf of bread, and
that's it. The money doesn't know who you are. Neither does the bread.
The baker doesn't have to know or care who you are. No names or
identities are necessary. Contrast that to any online payment you made
in the last decade. You go to the online shop --- which probably already
knows everything about you, and if it doesn't, forces you to register
--- every click and every keystroke is monitored and analyzed. Once you
find what you're looking for you pay with PayPal, a credit card, or
similar payment processors that also know way too much about you. The
transaction has to be approved by this third party, and will only be
approved if your identity is known and you aren't offending the
moralities of the companies and jurisdictions involved.

Bitcoin does away with all that nonsense. It is a return to a saner
world. It doesn't require an identity. It doesn't require approval. It
doesn't care who you are. It doesn't force you to show your ID card, or
your passport, or your face, or any other biometric identification. It
doesn't even care if you are human or not. Want more fairness in this
world? How about opting into a financial system that can not
discriminate. "Don't be evil" doesn't work. Can't be evil does.

Bitcoin allows us to build towards a better future. A future where True
Names are not required. The current system is broken in many ways. We
can do better. We must do better. One by one, people will discover the
beauty of Bitcoin and join this peaceful revolution. They will be free
to use their real names if they want to, but they don't need to do so.
This is Bitcoin. You can stay anonymous. You can be pseudonymous. That
is the beauty of it. True Names not required.

Gigi

---

This article first appeared in [Citadel 21, Volume 4](https://www.citadel21.com/true-names-not-required).

---

### Further Reading

- [True Names][true-names] by Vernor Vinge
- [A Cypherpunk’s Manifesto][cypherpunks-manifesto] by Eric Hughes

[true-names]: https://amzn.to/3imYapD
[cypherpunks-manifesto]: https://www.activism.net/cypherpunk/manifesto.html
