---
layout: post
title: "The Responsibility of Adopting Bitcoin"
description: Not only the moon is programmed in, but responsibility too.
date: 2021-03-14
blocktime: 674473
image: /assets/images/btc21-kings.jpg
source: https://dergigi.medium.com/the-responsibility-of-adopting-bitcoin-87ff96c6e8ef
author: Gigi
category: bitcoin
audio: /assets/audio/responsibility.ogg
tags:
 - Bitcoin
 - Writing
translations:
 - language: Spanish
   url: https://koty21.medium.com/la-responsabilidad-de-adoptar-bitcoin-6841e5c2e010
   author: Koty
   author_url: https://twitter.com/Koty_Auditore
 - language: Spanish (audio)
   url: https://anchor.fm/prtclbitcoin/episodes/prtclBitcoin-1-La-responsabilidad-de-adoptar-Bitcoin-por-Gigi-e143uvb
   author: Koty
   author_url: https://twitter.com/Koty_Auditore
 - language: French
   url: https://blog.stackinsat.com/la-responsabilite-de-ladoption-de-bitcoin/
   author: Sophie Portulan
   author_url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/sophieportulan/
---


There is a saying among bitcoiners, and it becomes more truthful and
apparent as time goes on: [You don't change Bitcoin. Bitcoin changes
you.](https://21lessons.com/1/)

Why is that? At first, I wasn't sure how to answer this question; I just
knew it was true. The reasons behind it remained somewhat
of a mystery to me. Yes, Bitcoin is incredibly resistant to change. And
yes, sound money [lowers your time preference][time preference].
That is definitely a large part of it. There is also the historical
tendency to get rich, so wealth and the economic freedom that comes with
it might be another part.

[time preference]: https://podcastnotes.org/crypto/oncebitten/saifedean-ammous-daniel-prince-time-preference/

Money, however, isn't always a blessing. It tends to amplify both good
and bad traits. It also has the power to corrupt, and it has the
potential to drive people insane. If you aren't careful, what started as
sudden riches can soon turn into a power-drunk ego trip that ends in
*Bitcoin Derangement Syndrome*.

There is plenty of writing on low time preference and wealth already,
which is why I want to focus on the third thing that Bitcoin forces upon
you: responsibility.

### The Individual Is Sovereign

The whole idea of Bitcoin is to remove intermediaries from the equation.
[Trusted third parties are security
holes](https://nakamotoinstitute.org/trusted-third-parties/), and unless
we want to repeat past mistakes, it is our collective responsibility to
eliminate these security holes wherever and whenever we can. Bitcoin
allows for the elimination of trusted third parties because it loops
itself into existence from the bottom up instead of being created from
the top down. In Bitcoin, your self-sovereignty can be absolute.

Bitcoin emphasizes the [sovereignty of the
individual](https://dergigi.com/2019/08/22/the-rise-of-the-sovereign-individual/)
both in principle and in practice. It allows economic actors to store
and exchange value freely, requiring nothing but a valid cryptographic
signature. Group identity, gender, skin color, age, political or
religious affiliation --- all are irrelevant in the protocol's eyes. If
your transaction has a valid signature, Bitcoin will take you seriously.
No matter if you are a person, a
[dog](https://twitter.com/LABRAHODL9),
or an [attack
helicopter](https://twitter.com/PrestonPysh).

Just like intersectionality is resolved by focusing on the individual,
the problem of trusted third parties is resolved by focusing on
individual nodes. Remove social and political identities, and the
individual remains. Remove trusted third parties and external sources of
truth, and the self-sovereign node remains. And just like human dignity
is inviolable, the self-validating truth that your Bitcoin node
represents is inviolable. If an external authority could interfere with
your node's truth, the whole point of Bitcoin would be moot.

> Die Würde des Menschen ist unantastbar.
>
> <cite>Artikel 1 des Grundgesetzes für die Bundesrepublik Deutschland</cite>

It all boils down to individual nodes. Consequently, it all boils down
to the individuals operating these nodes.

### Responsibility Is Programmed

There is a reason why bitcoiners speak of "[the
journey](https://youtu.be/qVuFX0LkNDQ)" down the rabbit hole. The only
way to get into Bitcoin is to start small and improve incrementally. It
is neither easy nor comfortable, but it is also necessary. You can't do
everything "correctly" on day one. The challenges are too large, the
paradigm shifts too radical, the tradeoffs too many, and the issues too
nuanced.

Consequently, my advice to friends and family remains the same: [start
stacking sats
today](https://dergigi.com/2020/04/27/dear-family-dear-friends/). It
might not be the perfect advice for everyone under all circumstances,
but it is
[perfect](https://ofdollarsanddata.com/even-god-couldnt-beat-dollar-cost-averaging/)
in my eyes for the following reason alone: it forces you to take the
first step, which is having some sats to your name.

Once you have acquired some bitcoin, you have skin in the game. And once
you have skin in the game, you are on the path to become more
self-sovereign. You are on track to take responsibility for your
finances, for your savings, for your future, and, perhaps somewhat
surprisingly, for the future of Bitcoin.

Sounds grandiose? Let me explain: you will learn that you don't really
own bitcoin unless you hold your own keys. You will learn that you can't
be sure that what you're holding actually is bitcoin unless you validate
your transactions with your own node. You will learn that Bitcoin is
whatever you decide it to be, that the value of bitcoin does not come
from without but from within, and that maximum utility in the world of
Bitcoin entails the adoption of maximum responsibility.

The base reality of how the Bitcoin network operates, combined with the
growing number of reports of this effect --- a personal transformation
brought about by the adoption of a Bitcoin Standard --- makes me believe
that it isn't only the moon that is programmed, but the adoption of
responsibility is too.

Because [bitcoin is designed to pump
forever](https://twitter.com/matt_odell/status/1131559561872252928?s=20),
whatever skin you have in the game will soon grow to be a meaningful
amount. As the purchasing power of your bitcoin stack grows, your
incentive to become a first-class Bitcoin citizen will grow as well. You
will want to learn how to do self-custody. You will want to learn how to
run your own node.

It goes even beyond the mantras of "not your keys, not your bitcoin" and
"not your node, not your rules." It is in your best interest to support
the network, either by running a node, contributing hash power, or
indirectly by [supporting bitcoin
development](https://bitcoindevlist.com/). And here comes the kicker:
running your own node means that you are participating in the network
itself, which inevitably involves you in the process of defining what
Bitcoin is. Since nobody can tell you what Bitcoin is, *you* have to
decide what Bitcoin is for yourself, over and over again. The network is
a [growing, ever-changing
organism](https://dergigi.com/2019/08/07/proof-of-life/), and the opt-in
nature of protocol upgrades will repeatedly force the question of
Bitcoin's identity upon its participants.

*What is Bitcoin? And what should it be?* The lack of a central
authority implies that answering these questions is your responsibility,
in perpetuity. However, before you can dare to take on this
responsibility, you must take the first step and [start
saving](https://dcabtc.com/) yourself.
